Authorize rest requests (#2753)
opensearch-project/security: REST_AUTHZ_FOR_PLUGINS.md

> # Authorization at REST Layer for plugins

Reviewer: General feedback on this doc. I think it should convey to plugin developers that they can opt not to write a transport action for a route if its unnecessary. From what I understand, plugin developers will write a transport action to protect and endpoint and not because they need to write a transport action. This is fine, but I think the doc should touch on the subject.

Author: will add a note here.

> This feature is introduced as an added layer of security on top of existing TransportLayer authorization framework. In order to leverage these feature some core changes need to be made at Route registration level. This document talks about you can achieve this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature is introduced as an added layer of security on top of existing TransportLayer authorization framework. In order to leverage these feature some core changes need to be made at Route registration level. This document talks about how you can achieve this.
```

## Pre-requisites

> The security plugin must be installed and operational in OpenSearch cluster for this feature to work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The security plugin must be installed and operational in your OpenSearch cluster for this feature to work.
```

### How does NamedRoute authorization work?

> Once the routes are defined as NamedRoute, they, along-with their handlers, will be registered the same way as Route. Once the request comes in `SecurityRestFilter.java` applies an authorization check which extracts information about the NamedRoute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the routes are defined as NamedRoute, they, along-with their handlers, will be registered the same way as Route objects. When a request comes in, `SecurityRestFilter.java` applies an authorization check which extracts information about the NamedRoute.
```

> Next we get the unique named associated with that route and evaluate those against existing `cluster_permissions` across all roles of the requesting user. If the authz check succeeds the request chain proceeds as normal. Else, a 403 response is returned to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next we get the unique named associated with that route and evaluate it against existing `cluster_permissions` across all roles of the requesting user. If the authorization check succeeds, the request chain proceeds as normal. If it fails, a 403 response is returned to the user.
```

NOTE:

> 1. These action names defined in roles must exactly match the names of registered routes, or else, the request would be deemed unauthorized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The action names defined in roles must exactly match the names of registered routes, or else, the request would be deemed unauthorized.
```

2. This check will not be implemented for plugins who do not use NamedRoutes.

### How to translate an existing Route to be a NamedRoute?

Here is a sample of an existing route converted to a named route:
Before:
```
public List<Route> routes() {
    return ImmutableList.of(
            new Route(GET, "/uri")
        );
}
```
With new scheme:
```
public List<NamedRoute> routes() {
    return ImmutableList.of(
            new NamedRoute.Builder().method(GET).path("/uri").uniqueName("plugin:uri").actionNames(Set.of("cluster:admin/opensearch/plugin/uri")).build()
        );
}
```

`actionNames()` are optional. They correspond to any current actions defined as permissions in roles.
Ensure that these name-to-route mappings are easily accessible to the cluster admins to allow granting access to these APIs.

> ### How does authorization at REST Layer work?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How does authorization in the REST Layer work?
```

  cluster_permissions:
    - 'cluster:admin/opensearch/plugin/uri'
```

Successful authz scenarios for a user:
1. The user is mapped either to `plugin_role` OR `plugin_role_legacy`.
2. The user is mapped to both of these roles.
3. The user is mapped to `plugin_role` even if no `actionNames()` were registered for this route.

Unsuccessful authz scenarios for a user:
1. The user is not mapped any roles.
2. The user is mapped to a different role which doesn't grant the cluster permissions: `plugin:uri` OR `cluster:admin/opensearch/plugin/uri`/
3. The user is mapped to a role `plugin_role_other` which has a typo in action name, i.e.`plugin:uuri`.

### Sample API in Security Plugin

As part of this effort a new uri `GET /whoamiprotected` was introduced as a NamedRoute version of `GET /whoami`. Here is how you can test it:

#### roles.yml
```yaml
who_am_i_role:
  reserved: true
  cluster_permissions:
    - 'security:whoamiprotected'

who_am_i_role_legacy:
  reserved: true
  cluster_permissions:
    - 'cluster:admin/opendistro_security/whoamiprotected'

who_am_i_role_no_perm:
  reserved: true
  cluster_permissions:
    - 'some_invalid_perm'

```

#### internal_users.yml
```yaml

> who_am_i-user:

Reviewer: nit: mix of dashes and underscores

Author: I kept this on purpose, to differentiate between a role and a user since they have same prefix.

  hash: "$2a$12$VcCDgh2NDk07JGN0rjGbM.Ad41qVR/YFJcgHp0UGns5JDymv..TOG" #admin
  reserved: true
  description: "Demo user for ext-test"

who_am_i_legacy-user:
  hash: "$2a$12$VcCDgh2NDk07JGN0rjGbM.Ad41qVR/YFJcgHp0UGns5JDymv..TOG"
  reserved: true
  description: "Demo user for ext-test"

who_am_i_no_perm-user:
  hash: "$2a$12$VcCDgh2NDk07JGN0rjGbM.Ad41qVR/YFJcgHp0UGns5JDymv..TOG"
  reserved: true
  description: "Demo user for ext-test"
```

#### roles_mapping.yml
```yaml
who_am_i_role:
  reserved: true
  users:
    - "who_am_i-user"

who_am_i_role_legacy:
  reserved: true
  users:
    - "who_am_i_legacy-user"

who_am_i_role_no_perm:
  reserved: true
  users:
    - "who_am_i_no_perm-user"
```

Follow [DEVELOPER_GUIDE](DEVELOPER_GUIDE.md) to setup OpenSearch cluster and initialize security plugin. Once you have verified that security plugin is installed correctly and OpenSearch is running, execute following curl requests:
1. `curl -XGET https://who_am_i-user:admin@localhost:9200/_plugins/_security/whoami --insecure` should succeed.
2. `curl -XGET https://who_am_i_legacy-user:admin@localhost:9200/_plugins/_security/whoami --insecure` should succeed.

> 3. `curl -XGET https://who_am_i_no-perm-user:admin@localhost:9200/_plugins/_security/whoami --insecure` should fail.

Reviewer: Should this say whoamiprotected now?
